[FIX] - Refactoring testing section (#248)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: develop/parachains/testing/mock-runtime.md

---

> title: Mock Runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Mock Runtime for Pallet Testing
```

> description: Learn how to create a mock environment to test complete pallets functionalities in the Polkadot SDK, ensuring integration between pallets and system components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to create a mock environment to test complete pallet functionalities in the Polkadot SDK, ensuring integration between pallets and system components.
```

---

# Mock Runtime

## Introduction

> In Polkadot SDK development, testing is essential to ensure your blockchain operates as intended and effectively handles various potential scenarios.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Polkadot SDK development, testing is essential to ensure your blockchain operates as intended and effectively handles various potential scenarios.
```
```suggestion
Testing is essential in Polkadot SDK development to ensure your blockchain operates as intended and effectively handles various potential scenarios.
```

> This guide will walk you through setting up an environment to test pallets within the runtime. By doing so, you can evaluate how different pallets, their configurations, and system components interact, ensuring your blockchain functions reliably under real-world conditions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide will walk you through setting up an environment to test pallets within the runtime. Doing so lets you evaluate how different pallets, their configurations, and system components interact, ensuring your blockchain functions reliably under real-world conditions.
```

## Configuring a Mock Runtime

### Testing Module

The mock runtime includes all the necessary pallets and configurations needed for testing. To simplify the process, you can create a module that integrates all components, making it easier to assess how pallets and system elements interact.

Here's a simple example of how to create a testing module that simulates these interactions:

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachains/testing/mock-runtime/integration-testing-module.rs'
```

!!! note
    The `crate::*;` snippet imports all the components from your crate (including runtime configurations, pallet modules, and utility functions) into the `tests` module. This allows you to write tests without manually importing each piece, making the code more concise and readable.

> Alternatively, you can create a separate `mock.rs` file to define the configuration for your mock runtime, and a companion `tests.rs` file to house the specific logic for each individual test.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can create a separate `mock.rs` file to define the configuration for your mock runtime and a companion `tests.rs` file to house the specific logic for each test.
```

> Once the testing module is configured, you can craft your mock runtime using the [frame_support::runtime](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/attr.runtime.html){target=\_blank} macro. This macro allows you to define a runtime environment that will be created for testing purposes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the testing module is configured, you can craft your mock runtime using the [`frame_support::runtime`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/attr.runtime.html){target=\_blank} macro. This macro allows you to define a runtime environment that will be created for testing purposes:
```

The function `new_test_ext()` demonstrates setting up this environment. It uses `frame_system::GenesisConfig::<Test>::default()` to generate a default genesis configuration for the runtime, followed by `.build_storage()` to create the initial storage state. This storage is then converted into a format usable by the testing framework, [`sp_io::TestExternalities`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sp_io/type.TestExternalities.html){target=\_blank}, allowing tests to be executed in a simulated blockchain environment.

Here's the code that sets the genesis storage configuration:

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachains/testing/mock-runtime/genesis-config.rs'
```

You can also customize the genesis storage to set initial values for your runtime pallets. For example, you can set the initial balance for accounts like this:

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachains/testing/mock-runtime/genesis-config-custom.rs'
```

> ###  Pallet Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Pallet Configuration
```

Each pallet in the mocked runtime requires an associated configuration. To simplify testing, many of these types are basic or primitive, replacing more complex, abstract types.

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachains/testing/mock-runtime/pallets-configurations.rs'
```

The configuration should be set for each pallet existing in the mocked runtime.

!!! note
    The simplification of types is for simplifying the testing process. For example, `AccountId` is `u64`, meaning a valid account address can be an unsigned integer:

    ```rust
    let alice_account: u64 = 1;
    ```

## Where to Go Next

With the mock environment in place, developers can now test and explore how pallets interact and ensure they work seamlessly together.

> The [Pallet Testing](/develop/parachains/testing/pallet-testing/) guide offers comprehensive insights and best practices for navigating the intricacies of pallet testing.

Reviewer: Lets do a card here

---
title: Mock Runtime for Pallet Testing

> description: Learn how to create a mock environment to test complete pallet functionalities in the Polkadot SDK, ensuring integration between pallets and system components.

Reviewer 3: With this method, you can both inter pallet code, and intra pallet code.

---

# Mock Runtime

## Introduction

Testing is essential in Polkadot SDK development to ensure your blockchain operates as intended and effectively handles various potential scenarios.

> This guide will walk you through setting up an environment to test pallets within the runtime. Doing so lets you evaluate how different pallets, their configurations, and system components interact, ensuring your blockchain functions reliably under real-world conditions.

Reviewer 3: When it comes to my comment about conciseness, you just said in the paragraph above

> ensure your blockchain operates as intended and effectively handles various potential scenarios

and now you are saying

> ensuring your blockchain functions reliably under real-world conditions

Assuming the reader of this page is not a total noob (who doesn't even know what is the point of testing 😁), this is too much verbosity. Any above-amateur coder knows why you test your code. 

That being said, I will point such decisions to Anna in the future to flesh out based on more proper persona identification. 

But it is a good example as to how from a certain PoV, the style of writing across these docs is all targeted towards very beginner users via being verbose. 

No edits needed for now, just discussing.

## Configuring a Mock Runtime

> ### Testing Module

Reviewer 3: Another resource you can add as further reading is https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/guides/your_first_pallet/index.html#your-first-test-runtime

You can both learn from it yourself, and use it as "additional reading".

All the code in the above is tested, although it is using the old macros. 

Great oppurtunity to you actually to make a PR to polkadot-sdk :)

Author: We'll do! Thanks!

> The mock runtime includes all the necessary pallets and configurations needed for testing. To simplify the process, you can create a module that integrates all components, making it easier to assess how pallets and system elements interact.

Reviewer 3: Have we formally defined runtime in the glossary? it is a great candidate to go there, and you link to it.

Reviewer 3: You can get the definition from here: 

code-wise: https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/frame_runtime/index.html 

architecturally: https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/wasm_meta_protocol/index.html

Author: We do have a reference for "Runtime" in the glossary. I'll complement the actual definition with those concepts now, thanks!

> The mock runtime includes all the necessary pallets and configurations needed for testing. To simplify the process, you can create a module that integrates all components, making it easier to assess how pallets and system elements interact.

Reviewer 3: > To simplify the process, you can create a module that integrates all components, making it easier to assess how pallets and system elements interact.

Having a mock runtime is mandatory to do any testing, not the make thigns "easier".

Author: fixed!

> Here's a simple example of how to create a testing module that simulates these interactions:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here's a simple example of how to create a testing runtime that simulates these interactions:
```

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachains/testing/mock-runtime/integration-testing-module.rs'
```

!!! note
    The `crate::*;` snippet imports all the components from your crate (including runtime configurations, pallet modules, and utility functions) into the `tests` module. This allows you to write tests without manually importing each piece, making the code more concise and readable.

Alternatively, you can create a separate `mock.rs` file to define the configuration for your mock runtime and a companion `tests.rs` file to house the specific logic for each test.

Once the testing module is configured, you can craft your mock runtime using the [`frame_support::runtime`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/attr.runtime.html){target=\_blank} macro. This macro allows you to define a runtime environment that will be created for testing purposes:

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachains/testing/mock-runtime/mock-runtime.rs'
```
### Genesis Storage

> The next step is configuring the genesis storage—the initial state of your blockchain. Genesis storage sets the starting conditions for the runtime, defining how pallets are configured before any blocks are produced.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The next step is configuring the genesis storage—the initial state of your runtime. Genesis storage sets the starting conditions for the runtime, defining how pallets are configured before any blocks are produced.
```

> In Polkadot SDK, you can create this storage using the [`BuildStorage`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sp_runtime/trait.BuildStorage.html){target=\_blank} trait from the [`sp_runtime`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sp_runtime){target=\_blank} crate. This trait is essential for building the configuration that initializes the blockchain's state.

Author: great! I added that reference in a note, thanks

The function `new_test_ext()` demonstrates setting up this environment. It uses `frame_system::GenesisConfig::<Test>::default()` to generate a default genesis configuration for the runtime, followed by `.build_storage()` to create the initial storage state. This storage is then converted into a format usable by the testing framework, [`sp_io::TestExternalities`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sp_io/type.TestExternalities.html){target=\_blank}, allowing tests to be executed in a simulated blockchain environment.

Here's the code that sets the genesis storage configuration:

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachains/testing/mock-runtime/genesis-config.rs'
```

> You can also customize the genesis storage to set initial values for your runtime pallets. For example, you can set the initial balance for accounts like this:

Reviewer 3: what is critical and you are not mentioning is that you can only customize the fields that you define in your pallet via `#[pallet::genesis]`.

Ideally, this guide would take a few existing pallet, and one custom pallet (built in a previous tutorial), and stitch them together in a `mock`. This would check all the info boxes. 

Can this still be done?

Author: > what is critical and you are not mentioning is that you can only customize the fields that you define in your pallet via #[pallet::genesis].

@kianenigma, the `#[pallet::genesis]` macro is listed https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/pallet_macros/index.html.

Should I use `[#[pallet::genesis_build]](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/pallet_macros/attr.genesis_build.html)` instead?

> Ideally, this guide would take a few existing pallet, and one custom pallet (built in a previous tutorial), and stitch them together in a mock. This would check all the info boxes.

I believe this topic will be covered in the tutorials section; this guide is part of the development section. This part isn’t intended to be a step-by-step article, we showcase key concepts here so that tutorials can leverage them

Author: fyi - genesis macros clarification added in [f7f1272](https://github.com/polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs/pull/248/commits/f7f12725a27645cdfd96e4e6ad2bba28a24c97f5)

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachains/testing/mock-runtime/genesis-config-custom.rs'
```

### Pallet Configuration

> Each pallet in the mocked runtime requires an associated configuration. To simplify testing, many of these types are basic or primitive, replacing more complex, abstract types.

Reviewer 3: Can you elaborate by what you mean by 

> To simplify testing, many of these types are basic or primitive, replacing more complex, abstract types.

---
title: Mock Runtime for Pallet Testing
description: Learn to create a mock environment in the Polkadot SDK for testing intra-pallet functionality and inter-pallet interactions seamlessly.
---

# Mock Runtime

## Introduction

> Testing is essential in Polkadot SDK development to ensure your blockchain operates as intended and effectively handles various potential scenarios.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Simulating real-world operational conditions is essential to feeling confident your blockchain will perform as expected when you deploy it for interactions with users and applications. 
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> This guide will walk you through setting up an environment to test pallets within the [runtime](/polkadot-protocol/glossary#runtime){target=\_blank}. Doing so lets you evaluate how different pallets, their configurations, and system components interact, ensuring your blockchain functions reliably under real-world conditions.

Reviewer 2: Please write this in one paragraph under the intro rather than two. Thank you!
